# Debugging

As you create your prototype, you will find that things don't work the way you expect them to work. You will need to check what is happening behind the scenes as your code is executed. There are many ways development environments can support this task, but the simplest way is supported by your browser. Here, I recommend using Google Chrome as it offers the most powerful developer tools I know. You can access the Developer Tools in Chrome via the three-dots-menu on the top right, selecting "More Tools" > "Developer Tools". This will open a panel on the bottom or on the right (you can personalize that) that offers you a load of valuable features.

## Inspection

Most importantly, when selecting the "Elements" tab of the developer tools, you can explore the HTML document. In the browser, the HTML document is a hierarchical structure of elements with the body element as root. In this perspective you can expand the nodes of the document and see current properties as well as styles and layout on the right. This can help you to spot issues in structure and style.
 
Figure 6 - Inspection mode of the developer tools in Google Chrome. On top you see the page with a highlighting of the layout properties for the elements selected in the structure below. On the bottom right you see the layout information and the styles.

## Console

While the Inspect mode is important to understand the static structure of the document and what layout and style attributes are applied, the console is essential to understand the interactive behavior as the application is running. 
 
Figure 7 - Developer tools with the Console tab selected showing the console output of the browsers JavaScript engine.

The console in essence is the output of the browser's JavaScript engine and it can show messages generated by the code as well as error messages created by the engine.

* Simple console output - you can write variables or message strings to the console by using the console.log("This is the message text") function to see how things happen in sequence or what value a variable has.
* Object output - the console also allows you to output entire objects or parts of the document into the console by using console.log(object1, object2). This is great if you want to track the status of a more complex structure like an array. For instance, you can expand the array to see the individual values.
* Error messages - if you have made some mistakes in your code (e.g., syntax errors like not closing a bracket) or if runtime errors occur (e.g., variable is undefined) the runtime will show the error in the console. It can be helpful to read the error message and usually, you can directly jump to the position in the code, where this error occurs (see the references on the very right in the console).

We will use the developer tools a lot to spot typos, check variables and states and to understand how the document looks like.
